Adr/network reliability (#1082)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/adr/2023-09-08_026-network-resilience.md

---
slug: 26
title: |
  26. Network failures model
authors: []
tags: [Proposed]
---

## Status

> Proposed

Reviewer: I think we call it `Draft`, but I also like `Proposed` (let's change all to that status if you want that)

Author: ```suggestion
Draft
```

## Context

The current Head cluster is very fragile as has been observed on several occasions: A single hiccup in the connectivity between nodes while a head is open and nodes are exchanging messages can very easily lead to the Head being stuck and require an emergency closing, possibly even manually.

We want Hydra to be _Consistent_ in the presence of _Network Partitions_, under the _fail-recovery_ model assumption, eg. processes may fail by stopping and later recovering. Our system lies in the [CP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem) space of the landscape mapped by the CAP theorem.

We have identified 3 main sources of failures in the _fail-recovery_ model that can lead to a head being stuck:

1. The network layer can drop messages from the moment a node `broadcast`s it, leading to some messages not being received at the other end

> 2. The sending node can crash in between the moment the state is changed (and persisted) and the moment a message is actually sent through the network (or even it calls `broadcast`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The sending node can crash in between the moment the state is changed (and persisted) and the moment a message is actually sent through the network (or even when it calls `broadcast`)
```

Therefore, the scope of this ADR is to address only point 1. above: Ensure broadcast messages are eventually received by all peers, given the sender does not stop before.

### Discussion

* We are currently using the [ouroboros-framework](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network) and [typed-protocols](https://github.com/input-output-hk/typed-protocols) network stack as a mere [transport](https://osi-model.com/transport-layer/) layer.
  * Being built on top of TCP, ouroboros multiplexer (Mux) provides the same reliability guarantees, plus the multiplexing capabilities of course
  * It also takes care of reconnecting to peers when a failure is detected which relieves us from doing so, but any reconnection implies a reset of each peer's state machine which means we need to make sure any change to the state of pending/received messages is handled by the applicative layer

>   * Our [FireForget](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/8a8e0829964132bde8949e5249a1ab303af92fb8/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/Ouroboros/Type.hs#L31) ignores connections/disconnections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Our [FireForget protocol](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/8a8e0829964132bde8949e5249a1ab303af92fb8/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/Ouroboros/Type.hs#L31) ignores connections/disconnections
```

>   * Ouroboros/typed-protocols provides enough machinery to implement a reliable broadcast protocol, for example by reusing existing `KeepAlive` protocol and building a more robust point-to-point protocol than what we have now

Reviewer: Is this `KeepAlive` an existing typed protocol implementation? If yes, link to it please.

Author: ```suggestion
  * Ouroboros/typed-protocols provides enough machinery to implement a reliable broadcast protocol, for example by reusing existing `[KeepAlive](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/tree/master/ouroboros-network-protocols/src/Ouroboros/Network/Protocol/KeepAlive)` protocol and building a more robust point-to-point protocol than what we have now
```

  * There is a minor limitation, namely that the subscription mechanism does not handle connections invidually, but as a set of equivalent point-to-point full duplex connections whose size (valency) needs to be maintained at a certain threshold, which means that unless backed in the protocol itself, protocol state-machine and applications are not aware of the identity of the remote peer
* We have built our `Network` infrastructure over the concept of relatively independent layers, each implementing a similar interface with different kind of messages, to `broadcast` messages to all peers and be notified of incoming messages through a `callback`.
  * This pipes-like abstraction allows us to compose our network stack like:

    ```
     withAuthentication (contramap Authentication tracer) signingKey otherParties $
      withHeartbeat nodeId connectionMessages $
        withOuroborosNetwork (contramap Network tracer) localhost peers
    ```

>   * This has the nice property that we can basically swap the lower layers should we need to, for example to use [UDP](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/abailly-iohk/multi-node-udp/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/UDP.hs), or add other layers for example to identify [Multiple Heads](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/abailly-iohk/multi-node-udp/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/MultiHead.hs#L26)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * This has the nice property that we can basically swap the lower layers should we need to, for example to use [UDP](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/abailly-iohk/multi-node-udp/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/UDP.hs), or add other layers for example to address specific head instances in presence of [multiple heads](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/abailly-iohk/multi-node-udp/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Network/MultiHead.hs#L26)
```

## Decision

* We implement our own message tracking and resending logic as a standalone `Network` layer

> * That layer consumes and produces `Authenticate`d messages in order to identify the source of messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* That layer consumes and produces `Authenticated msg` messages as it relies on identifying the source of messages
```

* It uses a vector of monotonically increasing _sequence numbers_ associated with each party (including itself) to track what are the last messages from each party and to ensure FIFO delivery of messages
* This _vector_ is also used to identify peers which are lagging behind and to resend the missing messages, or to drop messages which have already been received
* This _vector_ is also piggybacked by the ping messages of the heartbeat mechanism so that a node informs its peers of its own situation even if it would have, otherwise, no message to sent to them

> * Sending a ping message does not influence the _vector_ of the sender

Reviewer: What does piggybacking here mean? How exactly is the relationship between this `Resending` and the `Heartbeat` layer?

* Any message received which index does not match what the peer expects is dropped

> * Messages deemed not received by a peer a re-sent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Messages deemed not received by a peer are re-sent
```

I would have expected this to be further up. For example as part of the first bullet point in the decision block

## Consequences

* We keep our existing `Network` interface hence all messages will be resent to all peers
  * This could be later optimized either by providing a smarter interface with a `send :: Peer -> msg -> m ()` unicast function, or by adding a layer with filtering capabilities, or both

> * We need to ensure messages are not kept forever when resending, eg. that the pending messages list is garbage collected

Reviewer: Do we want to specify this further? i.e. To me, this consequence implies a *configurable* parameter to the `Resending` network layer, limiting how many messages are kept as a maximum.

Author: TL;DR in my opinion, this should be considered in the broader context of automatic head closing conditions for a node.

I wouldn't specify it here. In current implement we do not have any limitation on how many messages can be kept as a maximum. The reason is that we can garbage collect these messages when we're sure they've been received.

So the number of messages stored, in practice, is not limited and is dependent of the hydra network _quality_. If all peers are behaving correctly, on a working network, this number is exeptec to be very low. If, for some reason, the number of messages kept for re-sending them grows, it means we have, either a network problem, or a node being down. Then we should really keep all the messages until communication is restored or the head will get stuck.

So the question, I think, becomes rather how bad do we tolerate our peer network to be before closing the head, rather than dropping messages.

> * We need to refactor our `Heartbeat` layer to decouple the 2 capabilities it embeds, namely sending periodical heartbeats to peers, and providing listeners with information about a peer connection status, so that the `Reliability` layer can actually rely on those heartbeats to get regular update of peers' knowledge even when the actual Head is idle.

Reviewer: Related to my question about interaction here. Does the `Reliability` layer (I called it `Resending` before) depend on the `PeerDisconnected` kind of callback messages yielded by the `Heartbeat` layer?

Author: No. It relies only on the messages vector clock sent by a peer. Heartbeat messages can be helpful to piggy-back such information in the absence of applicative messages.

* We want to specify this protocol clearly in order to ease implementation in other languages, detailing the structure of messages and the semantics of retries and timeouts.
* We do not implement a _pull-based_ message communication mechanism as initially envisioned

> * We do not persist messages either on the receiving or sending side at this time

Reviewer: IMO these two items rather  qualify as "decisions" than as consequences, albeit dependent on our main decision of using an in-memory buffer.
